docs: :building_construction: expand on `read_*()` and `list_*()` in design (#237)
dp-next/registers2parquet: vignettes/design.qmd

The actions are:

- `get`: Get project IDs or paths.
- `list`: List files in a directory, e.g., SAS or Parquet files.
- `convert`: Convert a register SAS file (or multiple) to Parquet.
- `read`: Read a Parquet register into R as a DuckDB table.
- `use`: Use a template in the current project.

> While the objects are:

Author: ```suggestion 
The objects are:
```

- `chunk_size`: Number of rows to read per chunk during conversion.
- `path`: A character vector of one or more paths.

> - `project_id`: A number indicating the project id, e.g., on Denmark's

Author: ```suggestion
- `project_id`: A number indicating the project ID on Denmark's
```
What else could it be? :)

  Statistics.
- `output_dir`: The directory to save the Parquet output to.

> And two settings:

Author: ```suggestion
The settings are:
```

- `fastreg.project_rawdata_dir`: The directory where either the SAS or

>   Parquet files are stored. The `rawdata/` directory is read-only and

Author: ```suggestion
  Parquet files are stored. The `rawdata/` directory is read-only on Statistics Denmark server and
```
Maybe?

  contains the original SAS files. A project manager with the correct
  permissions can move (or request to move) Parquet files into this
  directory.
- `fastreg.project_workdata_dir`: The `workdata/` directory is where
  Parquet files are stored for projects without a project manager and
  where the users don't have permissions to save the converted files

>   into `rawdata/`. Usually this directory is used to store and edit R

Author: ```suggestion
  into `rawdata/`. Usually, this directory is used to store and edit R
```

>   scripts, documents, and other files, but can also store Parquet files.

Author: ```suggestion
  scripts, documents, and other files, but it can also store data files (e.g., SAS or Parquet files).
```
Or is it only Parquet files?

The actions are:

- `get`: Get project IDs or paths.
- `list`: List files in a directory, e.g., SAS or Parquet files.
- `convert`: Convert a register SAS file (or multiple) to Parquet.
- `read`: Read a Parquet register into R as a DuckDB table.
- `use`: Set up `_targets.R` and a Quarto log template.
- `get`: Get or guess some information, e.g., the project ID, workdata
  directory, or rawdata directory from the current working directory.

The objects are:

- `chunk_size`: Number of rows to read per chunk during conversion.
- `path`: A character vector of one or more paths.
- `project_id`: A number indicating the project ID on Denmark's

>   Statistics.

Author: ```suggestion
- `project_id`: A number indicating the project ID on Statistics
  Denmark.
```

  Parquet files are stored for projects without a project manager and
  where the users don't have permissions to save the converted files
  into `rawdata/`. Usually, this directory is used to store and edit R
  scripts, documents, and other files, but it can also store data files
  (e.g., SAS or Parquet files).

These two settings are used to help make the experience of working with
and managing the conversion and reading of registers smoother.

::: callout-tip
For a list of all the public functions, see the
[Reference](https://dp-next.github.io/fastreg/reference/index.html)
page.
:::

### Converting SAS files from a single register

```{mermaid}
%%| label: fig-flow
%%| fig-cap: "Expected workflow for converting SAS files from a single register using `convert_register()`."
%%| fig-alt: "A flowchart showing the expected flow of converting register SAS files to Parquet files."
flowchart TD
    get_project_dir("get_project_dir()")
    list_sas_files("list_sas_files()")
    path[/"path<br>[Character vector]"/]
    output_dir[/"output_dir<br>[Character scalar]"/]
    chunk_size[/"chunk_size<br>[Integer scalar]"/]
    convert_register("convert_register()")

>     output[/"Parquet file(s)<br>written to output_dir"/]

Author: What happened here? ☺️ We don't have `convert_register()` anymore, only `convert()`

Reviewer: I don't know! Weird..

find the relevant Parquet dataset (as partition) and read them in as a
single DuckDB table.

```{mermaid}
%%| label: fig-flow-read-register
%%| fig-cap: "Expected workflow for reading a Parquet register as a DuckDB table using `read_register()`."
%%| fig-alt: "A flowchart showing the expected flow of reading a Parquet register created with the fastreg package."
flowchart LR
    path[/"name<br>[Character scalar]"/]
    read_register("read_register()")
    output[/"Output<br>[DuckDB table]"/]

    %% Edges
    path --> read_register --> output
```

However, we can't guarantee that the `read_register()` function will
correctly guess and/or find the register as a Parquet dataset. So we
also provide two more flexible functions: `read_parquet_partition()` and
`read_parquet_file()`.

`read_parquet_partition()` underlies `read_register()`, but without
guessing the path. It takes a direct path to the Parquet dataset (the
directory containing the Hive-partitioned Parquet files), applies some
settings to more smoothly read in the datasets, and converts it into a
DuckDB table. This function would be used if `read_register()` failed to

> correctly read the right dataset.

Author: ```suggestion
DuckDB table. This can be used if `read_register()` fails to
correctly read the right dataset.
```

`read_parquet_file()` is the simplest read function. It takes a direct
path to a `.parquet` file (not a partitioned dataset) and reads it in as
a DuckDB table. This would be used if the register wasn't in a

> partitioned format.

Author: ```suggestion
a DuckDB table. This can used if the register isn't in a
partitioned format.
```

### List SAS and Parquet files

To help with management as well as discovery of available registers

> (that we also want to use internally for some of the other functions),

Author: ```suggestion
To help with management as well as discovery of available registers,
```

> we also provide some helper functions to list the available SAS and

Author: ```suggestion
we also provide helper functions to list the available SAS and
```

Parquet files and partitioned datasets.

> `list_parquet_files()` takes the directory of the project ID and lists

Author: ```suggestion
`list_parquet_files()` takes the directory of the project and lists
```
or? :)

`read_parquet_file()`.

`read_parquet_partition()` underlies `read_register()`, but without
guessing the path (or when the setting hasn't been set). It takes a
direct path to the Parquet dataset (the directory containing the
Hive-partitioned Parquet files), applies some settings to more smoothly
read in the datasets, and reads it as a DuckDB table. This function
can be used if `read_register()` failed to correctly read the right
dataset.

`read_parquet_file()` is the simplest read function. It takes a direct
path to a `.parquet` file (not a partitioned dataset) and reads it as
a DuckDB table. This can used if the register isn't in a
partitioned format.

### List SAS and Parquet files

To help with management as well as discovery of available registers,
we also provide helper functions to list the available SAS and
Parquet files and partitioned datasets.

`list_parquet_files()` takes the directories given within the settings
and lists all Parquet files found within those directories that follow
the `part-*.parquet` pattern. If no setting is given, the project ID
will be guessed from the working directory path and the default location

> will be the `rawdata/` and `workdata/` directories. If those locations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will be the `rawdata/` and `workdata/` directories, e.g. commonly looks
like `E:/rawdata/<project-id>/` on DST. If those locations
```

    style edit fill:#FFFFFF, color:#000000, stroke-dasharray: 5 5
```

### Reading a Parquet files

> fastreg provides three ways to read in a Parquet registers depending on

Author: ```suggestion
fastreg provides three ways to read Parquet registers depending on
```

the use case.

`read_register()` is the main read function. We wanted a function that
could make it really easy to use and read in a particular register

> (along with all of it's years if it is in a partition format). For

Author: ```suggestion
(with data from all available years if it is in a partitioned Partition format). For
```

wanted it as simple as `read_register("bef")`. It should automatically
find the relevant Parquet dataset (as partition) and read them in as a
single DuckDB table.

```{mermaid}
%%| label: fig-flow-read-register
%%| fig-cap: "Expected workflow for reading a Parquet register as a DuckDB table using `read_register()`."
%%| fig-alt: "A flowchart showing the expected flow of reading a Parquet register created with the fastreg package."
flowchart LR
    path[/"name<br>[Character scalar]"/]
    read_register("read_register()")
    output[/"Output<br>[DuckDB table]"/]

    %% Edges
    path --> read_register --> output
```

However, we can't guarantee that the `read_register()` function will
correctly guess and/or find the register as a Parquet dataset. So we
also provide two more flexible functions: `read_parquet_partition()` and
`read_parquet_file()`.

`read_parquet_partition()` underlies `read_register()`, but without
guessing the path (or when the setting hasn't been set). It takes a
direct path to the Parquet dataset (the directory containing the
Hive-partitioned Parquet files), applies some settings to more smoothly

> read in the datasets, and converts it into a DuckDB table. This function

Author: ```suggestion
read in the datasets, and reads it as a DuckDB table. This function
```

> would be used if `read_register()` failed to correctly read the right

Author: ```suggestion
can be used if `read_register()` failed to correctly read the right
```

dataset.

`read_parquet_file()` is the simplest read function. It takes a direct

> path to a `.parquet` file (not a partitioned dataset) and reads it in as

Author: ```suggestion
path to a `.parquet` file (not a partitioned dataset) and reads it as
```

a DuckDB table. This would be used if the register wasn't in a
partitioned format.

### List SAS and Parquet files

To help with management as well as discovery of available registers
(that we also want to use internally for some of the other functions),
we also provide some helper functions to list the available SAS and
Parquet files and partitioned datasets.

> `list_parquet_files()` takes the directories given within the settings

Author: do we have a flow diagram for `list_parquet_files()`?

Reviewer: For a simple function this like, not needed ☺️ I will include a function signature though.

Reviewer: Actually, since there is no input and only one type of output, a signature isn't needed.

and lists all Parquet files found within those directories that follow
the `part-*.parquet` pattern. If no setting is given, the project ID
will be guessed from the working directory path and the default location

> will be the `rawdata/` and `workdata/` directories. If those locations

Author: Potentially add specifically what these directories look like, something like `E:/{project_id}/rawdata`?

> are different, the setting must be set. That way, users can use

Author: ```suggestion
are different than was is expected bt default, the setting must be set. That way, users can use
```
